---
id: open-sourcing-sorbet-compiler
title: Sorbet Compiler: An experimental, ahead-of-time compiler for Ruby
---

For the past year, the [Sorbet](https://sorbet.org/) team has been working on an
experimental, ahead-of-time compiler for Ruby, powered by Sorbet and LLVM. Today
we're sharing the source code for it. It lives alongside the existing code for
Sorbet on GitHub, mostly in the `compiler/` folder:

→ <https://github.com/sorbet/sorbet/tree/master/compiler/>

We want to be clear up front: the code is nowhere near ready for external use
right now, but we welcome you to read the code and give us feedback on our
approach!

We teased this a few weeks back in a tweet, which drew a fair bit of attention,
and also a lot of questions:

<!--truncate-->

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">We&#39;re big believers in multi-year infrastructure bets. After a few years of Ruby infra work, our in-house Ruby compiler is now 22–170% faster than Ruby&#39;s default implementation for Stripe&#39;s production API traffic. If interested in working on such problems, we&#39;re hiring!</p>&mdash; Patrick Collison (@patrickc) <a href="https://twitter.com/patrickc/status/1410269843585069056?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">June 30, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Before answering the questions raised in the above discussion, some disclaimers:

- If you're an existing Sorbet user, nothing changes for you! You can continue
  to use Sorbet to typecheck your Ruby codebases exactly as you do now. While
  the Sorbet Compiler code lives in the Sorbet repo, it doesn't change anything
  about Sorbet, nor is it required to use Sorbet.

- There are no Sorbet Compiler binary releases. If it works out, we may some day
  publish pre-built binaries of the Sorbet Compiler, but right now we don't have
  any firm plans. We welcome you to read the source and try to compile it
  yourself if you're curious.

- While we are using the Sorbet Compiler at Stripe in production, it should NOT
  be considered "production ready." We won't prioritize fixing issues that don't
  also affect Stripe. It is an internal experiment developed in the open.

With those disclaimers out of the way, let's dive into the frequently asked
questions.

## What's your goal in open sourcing it now?

We have a few goals. The first handful are entirely pragmatic:

- Even though the Sorbet Compiler's repo was private, we had already shared it
  with a handful of companies and individuals, which was toilsome.
- Sometimes improving the compiler requires improving Sorbet. Such changes will
  only require one PR in one repo now.
- The Sorbet Compiler depends on Sorbet's internal data structures. Now that the
  two repos are one, they can share internal data structures directly.
- Much of the Bazel build and test infrastructure in the two repos was
  duplicated, but can now be shared.

Apart from these pragmatic considerations, we're interested in gathering
feedback from the larger community on our approach. Feel free to read the source
code and [reach out to us](https://sorbet.org/en/community) with what you have
to say.

## Why does Stripe care about Ruby performance?

At Stripe, our primary product is an API. In an API,
[latency is a feature](https://blog.nelhage.com/post/reflections-on-performance/)
just as much as what the API lets you do. Stripe is a users-first company, and
those users have asked for lower latency.

Improving latency involves doing one of two things:

- Spending less time doing IO (e.g. network and storage), or
- Spending less time in compute (i.e., Ruby)

Other teams at Stripe are tackling latency from the IO angle. In parallel, we've
been working on building a "[big hammer](https://youtu.be/sT6VJkkhy0o?t=454)"
for improving Ruby compute performance.

## Why build a compiler…?

This is our most popular question, and it comes in a bunch of different forms:

- Why build an ahead-of-time compiler, instead of a JIT compiler?
- Why build a compiler, instead of using TruffleRuby or JRuby?
- Why build a compiler, instead of making improvements to the Ruby VM?
- Why build a compiler for Ruby, instead of using another language?

You really want to know why, so here it is!

### Why build an ahead-of-time compiler, instead of a JIT compiler?

There are a handful of reasons, which we'll address one by one.

First, instead of having to ship an entire language runtime to production, with
an ahead-of-time compiler the compilation happens once in CI. We already ship
various generated code and data files in our deploy archives—compiled artifacts
fit seamlessly with our existing build pipelines. This also limits the blast
radius if something were to go wrong: if we need to "turn off" the compiler, we
just stop loading the compiled archives and let the Ruby VM run the original
source.

Another point: ahead-of-time compilers are conceptually simpler. When we kicked
off the Sorbet Compiler project, we estimated that it would take us less time to
build an ahead-of-time compiler delivering real-world performance improvements
than it would take to build a JIT that fulfills both our latency goals and
Stripe security requirements. As we'll discuss below, our chosen implementation
strategy makes ahead-of-time compilation simpler and easier to roll out
gradually.

And finally, ahead-of-time compilation lets the project exploit type information
present statically, after Sorbet has type checked a project. While a JIT
observes the types at runtime to inform how it compiles the code, Sorbet already
has this information present (unless the code uses
[`T.untyped`](https://sorbet.org/docs/untyped)). Of course, this is a classic
tradeoff between a compiler and a JIT: sometimes the runtime type information is
actually better, because JITs can see through interfaces and polymorphism. We
don't claim to have solved this tradeoff in the Sorbet Compiler, but Stripe's
Ruby codebase is extensively covered by Sorbet, and is thus uniquely positioned
to make use of this static type information.

### Why build a compiler, instead of using JRuby or TruffleRuby?

Many people in the Ruby community have found success replacing the Ruby VM with
either JRuby or TruffleRuby. JRuby makes it easy for Ruby to interoperate with
other JVM languages, and the same goes for TruffleRuby with GraalVM. Both claim
impressive performance improvements as well as enticing features like multicore,
shared-memory concurrency.

But nearly all of Stripe's codebase is implemented in Ruby running on the
default Ruby VM (YARV). Not only did we not need Java VM-level interoperability,
choosing either alternative Ruby implementation would have made for a difficult
migration path. Stripe relies heavily on gems with native extensions, and as you
can imagine, a multi-million line Ruby codebase over time starts to depend on
Ruby-the-implementation, not just Ruby-the-language.

Another hurdle in switching to one of these implementations is that it has to be
done at a service boundary. We could have migrated some of Stripe's smaller
services, but Stripe's most latency-sensitive services are large, monolithic
Ruby services without clear breaking points. To adopt JRuby or TruffleRuby in
Stripe's most important services, we'd have to be able to run all the code or
none of the code (at least on a subset of traffic).

Below we'll talk below the implementation of the Sorbet Compiler, which solves
for this situation in a couple of ways:

1. The Sorbet compiler targets Ruby native extensions, which trivially
   interoperate with all other Ruby code. We don't have to give up the Ruby VM
   (quirks and all), and can continue to use all our existing gems and native
   extensions.

2. Because it compiles to native extensions, we can enable the compiler at the
   source file level instead of the service level. While we iron out the bugs in
   our compiler and adopt it in production, we can carve out arbitrarily large
   or small swaths of Stripe's codebase to experiment with.

### Why build a compiler, instead of making improvements to the Ruby VM?

Another way of phrasing this question: are you going to upstream your changes to
the Ruby VM?

Ruby is fundamentally an interpreted language. Apart from maybe having a CI step
to pre-download third-party gems, many Ruby projects do not have any sort of
build step—the project's Ruby source code is meant to run run unprocessed by the
Ruby VM.

By contrast, our hypothesis was that we could deliver substantial performance
improvements by paying the cost of a one-time compilation step. Stripe already
has an extensive Ruby build pipeline, so this cost is minor.

And as mentioned above, the Sorbet Compiler relies entirely on Sorbet.
Specifically: it **cannot** work in a project that has not already adopted
Sorbet. The Ruby maintainers have made it very clear that they do not want to
force static typing on all users of the language, so there's no place for the
Sorbet Compiler upstream.

### Why build a compiler for Ruby, instead of using another language?

Great question, and the answer is: at Stripe we're doing both!

A handful of teams at Stripe urgently need their code to run faster. Maybe a
team's highest priority is improving latency in a small service with clear
boundaries. Or maybe a team is starting a greenfield project and anticipates
performance bottlenecks. Teams at Stripe have the choice between Ruby, Java, and
Go to build services in, depending on their needs.

But Stripe's existing Ruby codebase is many millions of lines, and implements
Stripe's most business-critical workloads. Even if we wanted to get rid of Ruby
(remember: many people value the unique expressiveness of Ruby!), it would take
a long time to rewrite all of Stripe's Ruby code into another language.

As teams rewrite or build smaller projects in other languages, our team has been
working to tackle the elephant in the room: the millions of lines of existing
Ruby code powering Stripe's core products.

## How does it work?

The Sorbet Compiler is an ahead-of-time compiler for Ruby codebases that use
Sorbet, powered by LLVM and the existing Ruby VM. The high level technique looks
like this:

![](/img/sorbet-compiler-high-level.png)

There are two phases: what happens in CI (to compile the code), and what happens
in production (to run the code).

When compiling the code, we start with normal `*.rb` source files, feeding them
to Sorbet to be typechecked. The output of type checking is a custom
type-annotated intermediate representation (IR), which the Sorbet Compiler
consumes to generate LLVM IR. LLVM takes this IR and generates native shared
object (`*.so`) files.

These shared objects are actually valid Ruby native extensions, conforming to
and using the same APIs as gems which include native extensions use. Thus, the
compiled artifacts use the same object model and runtime representation that all
other Ruby code uses!

The Ruby VM exposes quite an extensive set of APIs to extension authors, which
are sufficient to call back into the Ruby VM when a faster compilation strategy
doesn't exist for a particular language feature. We might write more in the
future about how specifically we go from Sorbet's typed IR to Ruby native
extensions, but there this means that there is very little the Sorbet Compiler
_can't_ handle.

The decision to compile or not compile a file is made by adding a
`# compiled: true` or `# compiled: false` comment to the top of a Ruby source
file. If a file is compiled, the compiled artifact is bundled into a service's
deploy archive like all other Ruby and data files.

At runtime, a small support module monkeypatches `require_relative` to skip
requiring the original `*.rb` file and instead require the newly compiled `*.so`
file if possible. Since these compiled artifacts are Ruby native extensions,
they can define classes, modules, and methods just the same as if a Ruby file
had been required.

Architected this way, the Sorbet Compiler turns Ruby into a language for writing
Ruby native extensions! Instead of having to write C, C++, Rust, or some other
compiled language to write native extensions, people can continue to write Ruby
but gain the benefits of native compiled speeds.

## How fast is it?

We're still very early on in the project, but we're encouraged by our initial
results. We've been running the Sorbet Compiler in production at Stripe for
about a year, and as the tweet above mentioned, we're finally starting to see
the payoff, with varying results depending on the workload.

That being said, we don't have much more to share about performance right now.
We measure ourselves not against synthetic benchmarks, but against real-world
Stripe workloads, which are not public. We have some synthetic benchmarks
checked into the source repository, but none of these are representative and
mostly serve to help us debug and minimize performance problems we've seen in
the wild.

If you have a production workload you'd like to try the Sorbet Compiler on feel
free to take the source code and get it running your benchmark (of course: a
pre-requisite will be getting the benchmark to typecheck with Sorbet). Expect
hiccups and maybe even show-stopping bugs, as we have not tested the compiler in
environments that differ from Stripe's internal production environment. If you
do try things out, feel free to let us know!

## What's next?

Over the next six months we're going to be heads down focusing on making the
Sorbet Compiler perform even better on real-world code at Stripe. We're excited
to share more with you once we've made more progress!

To get in touch with us, find us on our Sorbet Slack:

→ <https://sorbet.org/slack>

Thanks!\
— The Sorbet team
