---
id: error-reference
title: Sorbet Error Reference
sidebar_label: Error Reference
---

<style>
#missing-doc-for-error-code-box.is-hidden {
  display: none;
}
</style>

<div class="is-hidden" id="missing-doc-for-error-code-box">

> **Heads up**: There aren't any docs yet for <span id="missing-error-code">this
> error code</span>. If you have suggestions for what would have helped you
> solve this problem, click the "Edit" button above to contribute! Otherwise,
> try using the search above to find an answer.

</div>

> **Note**: This list is not exhaustive! Some errors are very context dependent
> and other error codes are not common enough to know how to generally suggest
> help. Contributions to this list are welcome!

This is one of three docs aimed at helping answer common questions about Sorbet:

1.  [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md)
1.  [Frequently Asked Questions](faq.md)
1.  [Sorbet Error Reference](error-reference.md) (this doc)

This page contains tips and tricks for common errors from `srb`.

## 1001

Sorbet has crashed. Please [report an issue]!

## 1004

Sorbet couldn't find a file.

## 2001

There was a Ruby syntax error. Sorbet was unable to parse the source code. If
you encounter this error but your code is accepted by Ruby itself, this is a bug
in our parser; please [report an issue] to us so we can address it.

## 4002

Sorbet requires that every `include` references a constant literal. For example,
this is an error, even in `# typed: false` files:

```ruby
module A; end
module B; end

def x
  rand.round == 0 ? A : B
end

class Main
  include x  # error: `include` must be passed a constant literal
end
```

Non-constant literals make it hard to impossible to determine the complete
inheritance hierarchy in a codebase. Sorbet must know the complete inheritance
hierarchy of a codebase in order to check that a variable is a valid instance of
a type.

It is possible to silence this error, but it should be done with **utmost
caution**, as Sorbet will fail in strange ways and make far less accurate
predictions about a codebase. To silence this error, use `T.unsafe`:

```ruby
module A; end
module B; end

def x
  rand.round == 0 ? A : B
end

class Main
  T.unsafe(self).include x
end
```

## 4010

There are multiple definitions for a method. Having multiple definitions for a
method is problematic, because it can make a codebase's behavior dependent on
the order in which files are loaded.

The only way to silence this error currently is to mark the offending file as
`# typed: false`.

## 4011

There are multiple definitions for the same type member within a given class or
module.

```ruby
class Main
  extend T::Generic

  Elem = type_member
  Elem = type_member # error: Duplicate type member
end
```

You can fix this by removing the second definition of the type member:

```ruby
class Main
  extend T::Generic

  Elem = type_member # ok
end
```

## 4015

This error usually comes when a class or module is dynamically defined and
stored into a constant, like this:

```ruby
A = ...
A::B = 1
```

where `...` is some expression which computes a class or module. Sorbet can't
know statically what this `...` code does (and for example even if could assume
that it's defining a class, Sorbet can't know what methods or constants it has).
Therefore, Sorbet does not support this pattern.

## 5002

This means that the typechecker has been unable to resolve a reference to a
constant (e.g., a Ruby class). Most commonly, this indicates that there's a
typo.

First, try confirming whether the code runs successfully. Does the code raise an
"uninitialized constant" error when run? If so, Sorbet caught a bug! Try finding
out why that constant is actually uninitialized.

If it isn't a typo, then there are a few other things to look at. If it looks
like the constant is related to a gem, maybe one of these helps:

- Is it coming from a gem? Sorbet does not look through the gem's source code.
  Instead, there must be an `*.rbi` file for this gem. Try finding the `*.rbi`
  corresponding to this gem, and searching through it for the constant.

  For more information, see [RBI files](rbi.md). If you are at Stripe, please
  instead see <http://go/types/rbi>.

- If the gem was recently updated, its `*.rbi` might need to be regenerated.
  Each RBI file has a line at the top which can be copy / pasted to re-generate
  the file when the underlying gem has changed.

- When deleting constants, sometimes they are still referenced from an
  autogenerated `*.rbi` file. If that's the case, consider deleting the constant
  or regenerating the file.

Another thing it could be: Sorbet explicitly does not support resolving
constants through ancestors (both mixins or superclasses).

Concretely, here's an example of code rejected and accepted by Sorbet:

```ruby
class Parent
  MY_CONST = 91
end

class Child < Parent; end

Child::MY_CONST    # error
Parent::MY_CONST   # ok
```

Alternatively, if it's much more preferable to access the constant on the child,
we can set up an explicit alias:

```ruby
class Parent
  MY_CONST = 91
end

class Child < Parent
  MY_CONST = Parent::MY_CONST
end

Child::MY_CONST    # ok
Parent::MY_CONST   # ok
```

## 5005

A class or instance variable is defined in the wrong context.

```ruby
# typed: true
class A
  extend T::Sig

  def foo
    @@class_var = T.let(10, Integer)
    @x = T.let(10, Integer)
  end

end
```

There are two such errors in the above. In the first, `@@class_var` is declared
outside of the class scope. In the second, `@x` is declared outside of the
`initialize` method.

For how to fix, see [Type Annotations](type-annotations.md).

## 5006

An instance variable has been redeclared with another type.

```ruby
# typed: true
class A
  extend T::Sig

  def initialize
    @x = T.let(10, Integer)
    @x = T.let("x", String)
  end
end
```

## 5008

A class was defined as the subclass of a `type_alias`. It also occurs if a
`type_alias` mixin is used in a class.

```ruby
# typed: true
A = T.type_alias(Integer)
class B < A; end # error: Superclasses and mixins may not be type aliases

module M; end

AliasModule = T.type_alias(M)
class C
  include AliasModule # error: Superclasses and mixins may not be type aliases
end
```

## 5011

A class inherits from itself either directly or through an inheritance chain.

```ruby
class A < A; end

class B < C; end
class C < B; end
```

## 5012

A class was changed to inherit from a different superclass.

```ruby
class A; end
class B; end

class C < A; end
class C < B; end
```

## 5013

A class or instance variable declaration used `T.cast` when it should use
`T.let`.

```ruby
class A
  @@x = T.cast(10, Integer)
end
```

For how to fix, see [Type Annotations](type-annotations.md).

## 5014

Given code like this:

```ruby
# typed: true
class Parent
  extend T::Generic
  Foo = type_member
end

class Child < Parent
  extend T::Generic
end
```

We need to change our code to redeclare the type member in the child class too:

```ruby
# typed: true
class Parent
  extend T::Generic
  Foo = type_member
end

class Child < Parent
  extend T::Generic
  Foo = type_member
end
```

The same thing holds for type templates.

## 5023

Some modules require specific functionality in the receiving class to work. For
example `Enumerable` needs a `each` method in the target class.

Failing example in
[sorbet.run](https://sorbet.run/#class%20Example%0A%20%20include%20Enumerable%0Aend):

```
class Example
  include Enumerable
end
```

To fix this, implement the required abstract methods in your class to provide
the required functionality.

Passing example in
[sorbet.run](<https://sorbet.run/#class%20Example%0A%20%20include%20Enumerable%0A%0A%20%20def%20each(%26blk)%0A%0A%20%20end%0Aend>):

```
class Example
  include Enumerable

  def each(&blk)
  end
end
```

## 5028

In `# typed: strict` files, Sorbet requires that all constants are annotated
with a `T.let`.

For how to fix, see [Type Annotations](type-annotations.md).

See also: [6002](#6002), [7017](#7017).

## 5034

Sorbet does not support creating normal Ruby constant aliases to type aliases.
Once a type alias is created, all subsequent aliases must also be type aliases.

Concretely, this is not allowed:

```ruby
A = T.type_alias(Integer)
B = A # error: Reassigning a type alias is not allowed
```

while this is:

```ruby
A = T.type_alias(Integer)
B = T.type_alias(A)
```

(Why? This is due to design tradeoffs to enforce stronger internal invariants.
Basically, Sorbet can emit more reliable warnings when users declare their
intent to create a new type alias.)

## 5036

See [5014](#5014). 5036 is the same error as [5014](#5014) but slightly modified
to allow more common Ruby idioms to pass by in `# typed: true` (5036 is only
reported in `# typed: strict`).

## 5047

A class or module tried to inherit, include, or extend a final class or module.

```ruby
class Final
  extend T::Helpers
  final!
end

class Bad < Final; end # error
```

## 5048

A class or module was declared as final, but a method in the class or module was
not explicitly declared as final with a final `sig`.

```ruby
class C
  extend T::Helpers
  final!

  def no_sig; end # error

  extend T::Sig

  sig {void}
  def non_final_sig; end # error

  sig(:final) {void}
  def final_sig; end # good
end
```

## 6002

In `# typed: strict` files, Sorbet requires that all instance and class
variables are annotated with a `T.let`.

For how to fix, see [Type Annotations](type-annotations.md).

See also: [5028](#5028), [7017](#7017).

## 7001

Sorbet does not allow reassigning a variable to a different type within a loop
or block. (Note that we model blocks similarly to loops, as in general they may
execute 0, 1, or more times). Due to implementation constraints, Sorbet does not
permit this behavior.

A prototypical example of code that might trigger this is code that sets a
variable to `nil`, and then updates it if some value is found inside a loop:

```ruby
found = nil

list.each do |elem|
  found = elem if want?(elem)
end
```

In most cases, we can fix this error by declaring the type of the loop variable
outside the loop using `T.let`:

```ruby
# This is a type annotation that explicitly widens the type:
found = T.let(nil, T.nilable(String))

list.each do |elem|
  found = elem if want?(elem)
end
```

**But my variable does not change its type, it is always a `Boolean`!**

In Ruby, there is no `Boolean` type. Instead, there are `FalseClass` and
`TrueClass` types, the union of which defines
[`T::Boolean` type as a union type](class-types.md#booleans).

When Sorbet encounters a variable declaration like `x = true`, it infers the
type of `x` as `TrueClass`. An assignment to `x` later on in the same block such
as `x = false` would imply that the variable is reassigned to a different type
(namely, to `FalseClass` in this case).

For this reason, a loop such as the following triggers an error:

```ruby
# Declares `found_valid` with type `FalseClass`
found_valid = false

list.each do |elem|
  # Might change the type of `found_valid` to `TrueClass`
  found_valid = true if valid?(elem) # error: Changing the type of a variable in a loop
end
```

The fix, again, is to use `T.let` to widen the type to `T::Boolean`:

```ruby
# Declare `found_valid` with type `T::Boolean`
found_valid = T.let(false, T::Boolean)

list.each do |elem|
  # Does not change the type of `found_valid`
  found_valid = true if valid?(elem) # ok
end
```

## 7002

This is a standard type mismatch. A method's `sig` declares one type, but the
actual value didn't match. For example:

```ruby
'str' + :sym  # error: Expected `String` but found `Symbol(:"sym")` for argument `arg0`
```

Even still, sometimes these errors can be rather confusing. Consider using
[`T.reveal_type`](troubleshooting.md) to pin down the origin of why Sorbet
thinks the types are what it says.

**Why does Sorbet think this is `nil`? I just checked that it's not!**

That's a [great question](flow-sensitive#limitations-of-flow-sensitivity), and
probably the most common question people have when using Sorbet!

It's answered here:
[Limitations of flow-sensitivity](flow-sensitive#limitations-of-flow-sensitivity)

## 7003

This error indicates a call to a method we believe does not exist (a la Ruby's
`NoMethodError` exception). Some steps to debug:

1.  Double check that the code actually runs, either in the REPL, in CI, or with
    manual tests. If the method doesn't actually exist when run, Sorbet caught a
    bug!

1.  Even if the method exists when run, Sorbet still might report an error
    because the method won't **always** be there. For example, maybe the value
    is [nilable](nilable-types.md), or we have a [union](union-types.md) of a
    handful of different types.

1.  Many times, methods are defined dynamically in Ruby. Sorbet cannot see
    methods defined with `define_method`. Sorbet also can't see methods defined
    using Ruby's `included` + `other.extend(self)` pattern. For such dynamically
    defined methods, Sorbet requires `*.rbi` files which define the method
    statically.

    See the [RBI](rbi.md) docs for how to regenerate the `*.rbi` files.

1.  <a class="anchor" aria-hidden="true" id="include-kernel"></a>Sorbet will
    complain about this code:

    ```ruby
    module MyModule; end

    sig {params(x: MyModule).void}
    def foo(x)
      x.nil? # error: Method `nil?` does not exist on `MyModule`
    end
    ```

    The `nil?` method is defined on `Kernel` in Ruby. `Kernel` is included in
    `Object` (which classes default to inheriting from), but not on
    `BasicObject` (which classes can optionally inherit from).

    The solution is to `include Kernel` in our module:

    ```ruby
    module MyModule
      include Kernel
    end
    ```

1.  Sorbet will complain about this code:

    ```ruby
    module MyModule
      def foo; puts 'hello'; end
    end
    ```

    The issue is similar to the above: `puts` is defined on `Kernel`, which is
    not necessarily included in our module. For this situation, there are
    actually two fixes:

    ```ruby
    # Option 1: include Kernel
    module MyModule
      include Kernel

      def foo; puts 'hello'; end
    end
    ```

    ```ruby
    # Option 2: Kernel.puts
    module MyModule
      def foo; Kernel.puts 'hello'; end
    end
    ```

## 7004

This error indicates that a method has been called with incorrect parameters.
There are a few cases where this can occur:

- Too many parameters
- Not enough parameters
- Trying to pass parameters that don't exist
- Missing required parameters
- Positional parameters used when the method expects named parameters, and vice
  versa

```ruby
def foo(x: nil); end

foo(1) # error
foo(y: 1) # error
foo(x: 1) # ok
foo() # ok

def bar(x:); end

bar() # error
bar(1) # error
bar(x: 1) # ok
```

## 7006

In Sorbet, it is an error to have provably unreachable code. Because Sorbet is
[sensitive to control flow](flow-sensitive.md) in a program, Sorbet can not only
track what types each variable has within all the branches of a conditional, but
also whether any given branch could be executed at all.

Erroring for dead or unreachable code is generally a way to prevent bugs. People
don't usually expect that some branch of code is never taken; usually dead code
errors come from simple typos or misunderstandings about how Ruby works. In
particular: the only two "falsy" values in Ruby are `nil` and `false`.

Note if you intend for code to be dead because you've exhausted all the cases
and are trying to raise in the default case, use `T.absurd` to assert that a
case analysis is exhaustive. See [Exhaustiveness Checking](exhaustiveness.md)
for more information.

Sometimes, dead code errors can be hard to track down. The best way to pinpoint
the cause of a dead code error is to wrap variables or expressions in
`T.reveal_type(...)` to validate the assumptions that a piece of code is making.
For more troubleshooting tips, see [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md).

If for whatever reason it's too hard to track down the cause of a dead code
error, it's possible to silence it by making a variable or expression
"unanalyzable," aka untyped. (When something is untyped, Sorbet will do very
limited flow-sensitivity analysis compared to if Sorbet knows the type. To make
something unanalyzable, we can wrap it in `T.unsafe(...)`:

```ruby
x = false

if x
  puts 'hello!' # error: This code is unreachable
end

if T.unsafe(x)
  puts 'hello!' # ok
end
```

In this (contrived) example, Sorbet knows statically that `x` is always `false`
and so our `puts` within the first `if` is never reachable. On the other hand,
Sorbet allows the second `if` because we've explicitly made `x` unanalyzable
with `T.unsafe(...)`. T.unsafe is one of a handful of
[escape hatches](troubleshooting.md#escape-hatches) built into Sorbet.

## 7014

Sorbet has a special method called `T.reveal_type` which can be useful for
debugging. `T.reveal_type(expr)` will report an error that shows what the static
component of Sorbet thinks the result type of `expr` is.

Making this an error is nice for two reasons:

- It makes our internal implementation easier 😅 We don't have some special-case
  messages and then error messages. The only thing Sorbet prints under normal
  circumstances are error messages.

- It serves as a reminder to remove `T.reveal_type` before committing a change.
  Since it's a proper error, Sorbet will exit with non-zero status until it's
  removed.

For more information, see [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md).

> Looking for how to assert that an expression has a certain type? Check out
> [Type Assertions](type-assertions.md).

## 7017

In typed: strict files, Sorbet requires that all methods are annotated with a
`sig`. In a `# typed: true` file Sorbet implicitly assumes that definitions
without types are `T.untyped`, but in a `# typed: strict` file, Sorbet will no
longer make this implicit assumption.

You can still add a `sig` which declares the arguments or return as `T.untyped`,
so `# typed: strict` does not outright ban `T.untyped`. The upside is that usage
of `T.untyped` is more explicit, which makes it easier to drive the number of
occurrences down. If you're seeing this warning, there's no time like the
present to add proper types to your public-facing API (i.e., your top-level
constant and method definitions)!

For how to fix, see [Method Signatures](sigs.md).

See also: [5028](#5028), [6002](#6002).

## 7018

At `typed: strong`, Sorbet no longer allows `T.untyped` as the intermediate
result of any method call. This effectively means that Sorbet knew the type
statically for 100% of calls within a file. This sigil is rarely used—usually
the only files that are `# typed: strong` are RBI files and files with empty
class definitions. Most Ruby files that actually do interesting things will have
errors in `# typed: strong`.

## 7019

Sorbet does not have great support for splats right now.

In general, when considering taking a variable number of arguments, consider
instead taking a single argument that's an array instead of a "rest" arg:

```ruby
# ----- AVOID THIS ----------------------------
sig {params(xs: Integer).void}
def foo(*xs); end

xs = Array.new(3) {|i| i}
foo(*xs)
# ---------------------------------------------

# ----- Do this instead -----------------------

sig {params(ys: T::Array[Integer]).void}
def bar(ys); end

ys = Array.new(3) {|i| i}
bar(ys)
# ---------------------------------------------
```

If it is not possible to refactor the code, the current work around is to use
`T.unsafe`:

```ruby
# ----- WORST CASE ----------------------------
# Prefer the solution described above

sig {params(xs: Integer).void}
def foo(*xs); end

xs = Array.new(3) {|i| i}
T.unsafe(self).foo(xs)
# ---------------------------------------------
```

## 7021

The method called declares a block parameter that is not `T.nilable`, but a
block was not passed when it was called.

This can be fixed by either passing a block to the method, or changing the
method's signature for the block parameter from `T.proc...` to
`T.nilable(T.proc...)` (and then changing the method to deal with a nilable
block parameter).

## 7023

This error occurs when a method is passed in a `Proc` object that Sorbet does
not know the arity for statically.

One instance where this can happen is when using `method`, since the arity of
method corresponding to the symbol is unknown. This can be fixed by passing in a
block with the correct arity:

```ruby
# typed: strict

extend T::Sig

sig {params(blk: T.proc.params(arg0: String).void).void}
def foo(&blk)
end

# ----- AVOID THIS ----------------------------
foo(&method(:puts))
# ---------------------------------------------

# ----- Do this instead -----------------------
foo do |arg0|
    method(:puts).call(arg0)
end
# ---------------------------------------------
```

## 7024

This error occurs when a generic argument is passed in as a block parameter.

In `# typed: strict` files, using a parameter from a method that does not have a
signature will cause this issue to be reported. Adding a signature to the method
will fix the issue.

```ruby
# typed: strict

extend T::Sig

# ----- This will error -----------------------
def foo(&blk)
    proc(&blk)
end
# ---------------------------------------------

# ----- This will not error -------------------
sig {params(blk: T.untyped).returns(T.untyped)}
def bar(&blk)
    proc(&blk)
end
# ---------------------------------------------
```

## 7026

Sorbet detected that it was possible for `T.absurd` to be reached. This usually
means that something that was meant to cover all possible cases of a union type
did not cover all the cases.

See [Exhaustiveness Checking](exhaustiveness.md) for more information.

[report an issue]: https://github.com/sorbet/sorbet/issues

<script src="/js/error-reference.js"></script>
